Laminar evolution of sequential angular adjustments.
Wow, that is quite a mouthful of a title.
I hope you find the actual code challenge to be more interesting and fun and thought provoking than
the very long and dry title.
There's actually only two real exercises in this code challenge, plus an initial one to set things
up.
It's also quite similar to the previous video in terms of the math, the analyses, the code, and the
visualizations, and you're going to get some curious and weird patterns of results in exercise two.
And then the purpose of exercise three is basically just to figure out what is going on with that weird
pattern.
Anyway, I think you're going to enjoy this code challenge.
So let's begin.
Exercise one just involves copying and modifying some code that you've used in the previous video.
So import GPT two Excel copy over all of the her sentences that we worked with in the previous video,
tokenize them, push them through, get the hidden states, activations, etc., etc. you can do this
whole code challenge on the CPU.
There's no need to access a GPU here.
This exercise can be almost entirely solved just by blindly copying code from the previous video.
So I will now switch to Python, but only very briefly, just to run a few lines of code and make sure
we're on the same page.
So yeah, import some libraries.
I'm just not importing the stats library here.
Otherwise it's similar to the previous exercise.
Here are the previous video here I'm importing GPT two and the text here.
This is all copied from before.
Okay.
So that is exercise one.
It's still going to take several minutes for this to load but that's fine.
Now for the main exercise in this code challenge.
In the previous video, I showed you how to calculate the angle between two vectors that correspond
to the same token, but passed in between transformer blocks.
And now in this exercise, you're going to apply a similar analysis except it's between successive tokens
within the same layer.
And then you'll repeat that analysis for all of the layers.
The question we want to investigate here is whether the token embeddings vectors for the target relative
to its preceding token has the a similar change compared to the two other tokens that are randomly selected
from the same sentence.
Okay.
So let me describe what you're going to do in detail.
So this is one of the sentences that we have here.
And of course her is the target word.
And in this sentence promoted is the token preceding the target.
So now you want to calculate the angle change between the vector for promoted and the vector for her.
That's going to give you one number for this sentence.
And then there are 54 sentences in total.
So you get these angle changes for each of those 54 sentences.
And then of course there are 48 transformer blocks.
So you want to repeat that analysis for all 48 transformer blocks all the hidden layers.
Now all of the individual angles you can show using thin lines.
And then you can average over all of the 54 sentences using a thick line very similar to the visualization
in the previous video.
And that's what this red line depicts over here.
So that's for the target to get the non-target sequence.
The blue lines here you want to pick randomly any two tokens from this sentence that are not the target.
And then you do that randomly for each sentence.
So each time it's going to be a different pair of randomly selected tokens from the sentence but within
the same layer.
So not completely shuffling across layers the way I did in the previous video.
So then you want to sort the two randomly selected tokens and then calculate their angle change.
So for example you might get the two tokens the and last or maybe you get manager and promoted.
Or maybe its promoted and weak.
So any two randomly selected tokens from this sentence, and then you sort them so that you're always
calculating the angle of the earlier token to the angle of the later token.
And then each sentence you get a new random pair of non-target tokens.
Again, you can pick any of the tokens in a sentence, but just exclude the token for the target.
Okay, hope that makes sense.
That is where the blue line here comes from.
Now when you get this result, this is going to give you a weird looking pattern.
The purpose of exercise three is to figure out what is going on with that weird pattern, what it means,
where it comes from.
But before getting to exercise three, I would like you to think about it.
That's what it says here and come up with some Hypotheses of what you think might be causing that strange
pattern of results.
I would also like you to notice the magnitude of the angle changes here in this exercise, compared
to what we observed in the previous video.
I hope you enjoy working through this code challenge.
And now I will switch to Python and discuss my code.
And that will lead us into exercise three, where we solve the mystery of the strange patterns of results.
Here is the main for loop for this analysis, where I loop over all of the sentences.
These two lines of code you've seen before.
This is where I'm getting the target index for the word her.
So the actual target token.
And then here what I do is randomly choose a.
So let me start by working my way from inside.
Okay.
So this these are the tokens in this sentence.
And then I want to know where are the tokens not or which tokens are not equal to the target token.
So this is the way that I can exclude the target token.
And then I find those and I randomly pick two of those without replacement.
That just makes sure that I'm not going to accidentally select the same exact token twice, which can
happen by chance.
If we had replace equals true.
Okay.
And then I am sorting those to make sure that the earlier token is first.
And then we get to the second token.
The later token.
Okay.
So now we have the target index and we have two.
This is going to be a two element numpy array for non-target indices.
Now I can loop over all of the layers.
Now this code you've seen mostly before in the previous video.
It should look familiar.
What's different is that in the previous Video.
The code looked like this.
So each layer the same target index relative to the previous layer.
Now what I'm doing is looking inside the same layer, but I have the target word relative to the previous
token.
So that is only a very small change in the code from the previous video.
But it's a pretty significant change because in the previous video, we were always looking at the change
in the angle for exactly the same token.
So it was always the same word, same token, just rotating a little bit.
But here it's always going to be different.
Right.
Because each target relative to its previous here that's thanked to her here it's admired to her nominated
to her and so on.
So every sentence has the same target token but a different non-target token.
Okay.
But that's okay for comparison because for the Non-targets we have two also randomly selected target
non-target tokens that are also going to be different from each other.
Okay.
So now I can run that analysis.
Also super fast takes less than a second.
Now I can do some plotting.
And this is also a very, very similar code to what I showed in the previous video.
Okay, so here is where we get the weird findings.
First of all, I will point out the actual magnitude of the angle differences.
Remember in the previous video these were around .1.2.
So basically an order of magnitude smaller compared to the size of the results that we see here.
Now that should not be surprising.
These are two different words that we are looking at the angle between.
Whereas in the previous video it was the same token the same word and it was just being modified.
So yeah, now we see much bigger angles of rotation relatively.
It also looks like the spread.
So the variability is increasing as we get later into the model.
So some angles are increasing.
Some angles are decreasing.
That means that some of these successive tokens are getting closer together and sometimes they're getting
further apart.
Now if you wanted a more precise interpretation, what you would have to do is basically split this
down the middle and try to find which are the sentences where it's increasing, which are the sentences
where the angles are decreasing.
So they're getting closer together.
And then you could look at those sentences and see if you see some consistency in the results.
Anyway, that is just a general suggestion that is not part of this code challenge.
Obviously, the most striking and curious result is that the the non-targets are split into these two
distributions, where some of them go up.
We have really large angle discrepancies, and some of them seem to be lower and basically the same
magnitude of change relative or compared with the targets.
So then that also means that the average is right in the middle.
This is one of these classic statistics situations where the mean does not actually indicate the central
tendency of the distribution, because the distribution is so perfectly split between high values and
low values.
And what is going on here?
That is the mystery of the bimodally distributed angles.
I am not going to answer the question for you here.
I'm not going to tell you how to resolve this mystery just yet.
That comes up in the next exercise.
Now to To reveal the mystery.
And actually, I'm not going to tell you the reveal.
I'm just going to tell you an analysis.
To do.
And then you will discover the solution when you run this analysis.
So it's very simple.
Just copy paste and modify the code from exercise two so that you calculate the vector angle differences
between successive pairs.
In particular, the first token relative to the second token, the second token relative to the third
token, and so on.
Of course these are indices here.
So zero means the first token in the sentence.
Now here in this legend I'm showing the pairs of indices in each color.
And just to be clear this analysis has nothing to do with the the targets.
So we're not working with targets anymore.
You don't need to worry about that.
This is really just about the first four pairs of successive tokens in each sentence.
Now, I think that when you implement this analysis and see this graph, you will figure out the mystery
from exercise two.
Oh, and also I would like you to transform these angles from radians into degrees.
That is just to give you a little bit more experience with the transformation there.
I hope you enjoy this exercise and find it elucidating.
Please pause the video now and switch to code.
And now I will switch to Python and continue this discussion.
Here I loop over sentences and then I loop over layers.
And now here I'm looping over tokens for token pairs.
So this is hard coded to four.
But that's fine.
So here are the vectors that we want always from the same layer always from the same sentence.
And here I'm just getting the token I index.
And then plus one and then calculating the angle between them.
Now this gives me an angle in radians.
So then to convert to degrees we just have to multiply by 180 over pi.
Okay.
So run that analysis.
And now I can generate that plot.
And this resolves the mystery.
So the weird thing that's happening is that basically all of this weird stuff up here that we saw up
here, all of these really high angles here, are randomly selected pairs where the first pair was the
very first token in the sentence.
And this is where both randomly selected pairs of both randomly selected tokens in the pair were not
the first token.
Okay.
So and then basically what's happening is that the very first token the model knows nothing.
It has no context.
It doesn't know what to do.
And then you finally get to another token, and now the model can start importing some contacts.
It's not a huge amount of context, but it is some context, and therefore the angle changes a lot.
So these vectors really rotate a lot in the very beginning after the first token.
And then after that you see the adjustments are relatively smaller.
Looks like they are decreasing with each successive pair, although I'm not going to statistically analyze
that.
Okay.
So that was pretty interesting.
I hope you enjoyed making that discovery.
To be honest, I don't think that the angles between sequential token embeddings vectors is as insightful
as tracking the same token across different layers, like what I showed in the previous video.
That's mainly because the sequential pairs of tokens in this code challenge We're all different from
each other.
I could imagine this kind of approach being more useful and more elucidating.
If the two tokens were the same, but the context was different.
Still, I wanted to include this video to make sure that you see a different application of the vector
angle difference analysis approach.
Another important take home from this video is yet another demonstration that the first token in the
sequence is processed very differently from the rest of the tokens.
These models really need a couple of tokens to like load in a relevant context, so you should try to
avoid making bold interpretations or even including in your analyses.
The first 1 or 2 tokens from each sequence, you can see those first tokens as like the model warming
up its engines.